Notes for Atari 8-bit Taipan
----------------------------

The Atari executable file format allows for concatenating executables.
The result is still a valid executable. I use this to load the splash
screen and custom font directly into memory before the main program loads.
The Makefile documents how all this works, but it might seem pretty
hairy if you're new to the Atari, C, Makefiles, and/or Perl.

The Apple version of the game was expected to be run on a monochrome
monitor. Like many other ports from the Apple to the Atari, there will
be color artifacts when using a composite monitor. If this bothers you,
you have several choices:

- At the title screen, press B and T to adjust the background and text
  colors. Different combinations will have more or less pronounced
  artifacts.

- Use a monochrome monitor. Zero artifacting, but you can't change the
  colors of course.

- Use a color monitor monitor with S-Video (separate chroma/luma)
  inputs. This will greatly reduce or even eliminate color artifacting.

- If you're stuck with composite or RF, try turning the color knob all
  the way down (and the contrast as high as you can stand it).

- In emulators, you can just disable artifacting.

On PAL systems, the ship explosions and sinking animations will be 20%
slower, and the prompt timeouts will be 20% longer (1 sec => 1.2 sec). I
don't think this is a real issue (it's not like Taipan is a fast-paced
arcade game).


Deliberate differences between the Apple II and Atari ports:

1. Turbo mode, in combat. See GAMEPLAY.txt.

2. The Atari version is noticeably faster than the Apple version on II+ or
   IIe. This is because it's written in C and assembly, not interpreted
   BASIC. A IIgs on the other hand...

3. "Press ESC for help" rather than ESC to start. Starting the game is
   done with the space bar or return key.

4. I made it possible to disable the sound, since it's kinda repetitive
   and annoying, plus the game "freezes" while sounds are playing (no
   threading on Atari!) which slows down gameplay.

5. Added a way to change the background color and text brightness. Only
   4 brightness levels, but all 16 Atari hues are available.

6. The "do you wish me to go to:" prompt is different:
   - It shows the ports' numbers in inverse video, except for the port
     you're currently at (to let you know that's an invalid choice).
   - You can press Enter to abort, in case you hit Q by accident. This
     just returns you to the port status screen.

7. Prompts that only accept one character no longer require pressing Enter.
   Gameplay is more streamlined this way. Apple and Linux are inconsistent:
   some prompts need Enter, some don't. In the Atari port, the only prompts
   that require Enter are:
   - naming your firm
   - entering an amount of cash or items (but not if you hit A for "all")

8. "We have 5 guns" is in an inverse video box. I think it looks nicer, and
   it matches the "You can afford 5" inverse video box on the trading
   screen.

9. The + that indicates more ships offscreen is inverse video. I find
   that I don't notice it's there, if it's normal video.

10. Current seaworthiness is always displayed during combat, rather than
    being overwritten with status messages. This is really important for
    Turbo combat mode, but a nice enhancement for regular combat too.

11. "You're ship is overloaded" => "Your ship is overloaded". Sorry,
    grammar nazi.

12. Updating the port status screen, and text printing in general, happens
    faster and cleaner-looking, due to using C and asm rather than BASIC,
    and also because the static parts of the screen aren't redrawn unless
    they need to be. (Grammar nazi? That's a run-on sentence...)

13. Apple uses floating point, no practical limit on cash/bank/debt.
    Atari currently uses 32-bit unsigned longs for cash and debt,
    though the bank is floating point. This leads to these gameplay
    changes:

    - If you try to make a sale, take out a loan, or withdraw from the bank
      an amount that would put you over 4.3 billion cash, you get a
      message "you cannot carry so much cash", and the transaction is
      aborted.

    - If your debt goes above 2 billion, you die and the game is over.

    Making cash a floating point value is possible, but not worth the
    effort as it's a *terrible* idea to carry billions (or even millions)
    of cash around, due to the possibility of getting robbed. By the time
    someone plays the game long enough to earn billions in cash, he'll know
    to leave most of it in the bank, not carry it around.

14. On Apple, price of General Cargo isn't always an integer (e.g. 6.5).
    Due to item #13 above, it's always an integer on Atari. I just don't
    think it adds anything to the game, and it would be a lot of work to
    implement.

15. On Apple, dead enemy ships sink one scanline at a time.
    On Atari, it's one character (8 scanlines). Both platforms have
    multiple sinking speeds, but the Atari speeds are faster.

16. When entering numeric amounts and the firm name, the Atari Shift-Delete
    key works as expected.

17. When entering numeric amounts, pressing K or M inserts 3 or 6 zeroes.
    This means you can type e.g. 100,000 as 100K, and 10,000,000 as 10M.

18. When playing on an 800, the standard Atari keyclicks will be heard.
    Disabling these on an 800 is non-trivial. On XL/XE machines, they are
    disabled to mimic the Apple version.

19. One prompt has been removed: "Limit your firm name to 22
    characters" is gone (instead, you just can't type more than
    the limit).

20. The game doesn't beep at you when you enter something incorrect. This
    is a stylistic decision (I hate error beeps). It does play the "bad
    joss" sound in a few places instead (e.g. trying to enter an empty
    firm name).

21. The cartridge version of the game has in-game help, if you press the
    ? key. So far this is only partly implemented.

22. On the combat screen, the ship graphics are different: the ship is
    1 pixel narrower than the Apple version, and the whole aspect ratio
    is different due to hardware differences (Atari monochrome pixels are
    taller than they are wide). Also, the damage to enemy ships isn't
    exactly the same (but it's close enough IMO).

23. The "Do you have business with Elder Brother Wu?" and "Will ye be
    wanting repairs?" prompts show the default answer (N and Y,
    respectively) the user gets if he presses Enter.

24. On Apple, the firm name is drawn in a different font from the rest of
    the game text. On Atari, it's the same font, in inverse video.

25. On Apple, the maximum firm name length is 22 characters. On Atari,
    it's 24.

26. On the Atari, when you press R for "Retire", you are prompted "Are you
    sure?". This is because it's *really annoying* to retire by accident,
    when you meant to press T for "Transfer Cargo".

Differences between the Apple II original and Linux port:

1. Linux has an 80-column screen layout, Apple is 40.
2. Apple version uses a custom font (actually, two, but I'm ignoring that).
3. Apple has sound, Linux does not.
4. Apple has graphical title screen, Linux has ASCII art.
5. Apple has graphical ships during battles, Linux has ASCII art.
6. On Apple, price of General Cargo isn't always an integer (e.g. 6.5).
   As a consequence, the cash and bank amounts aren't always ints either.
7. On Apple, some Y/N prompts (like 'Do you have business with Elder Brother
   Wu') you can press Enter for No. Linux port waits until you hit Y or N.
8. On Apple, ships show damage (get holes in them) as they get shot up.
9. On Linux, you can overpay McHenry (though you get no benefit from it).
   On Apple, payment amount gets clamped to the repair price, so you can
   e.g. be asked to pay 50,000 when you have 70,000 and safely enter A
   (you'll end up 100% repaired and still have 20,000 cash).
10. On Apple, dead enemy ships sink one scanline at a time, and there are
    at least 2 sinking speeds. On Linux, it's one character at a time.

The plan for the Atari port is to mimic the Apple version as closely as
possible... except #6 above. It doesn't really add anything to the game,
and it complicates the code more than I want to deal with. Also #10
will probably not happen (to me, the slow ship-sinking of the Apple
version is annoying anyway).

Right now, items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9 are implemented Apple-style;
and 6, 10 are Linux-style.

Future Ideas:

- A 5200 version. Most of the existing code will work there, but there's
  no keyboard, have to use the keypad on the joystick. Y/N prompts could
  use 1/0 and/or the side buttons, naming the firm would go away (just
  hardcode "Atari, Inc" or somesuch as the firm name), entering amounts
  would use the keypad (# and * for A and Enter, maybe the side buttons
  for K and M). Cargo types might be 1 for General Cargo, 2 for Arms,
  etc (have to display that on screen), and have "1-Fight, 2-Run, 3-Throw
  Cargo" in combat.

- Seen on a web version of Taipan played on a phone: A Turbo option for
  combat. Basically you press T to skip all the delays. It's still
  possible to change your orders in mid-fight, but you have to be
  quick. My implementation of this will make Turbo a toggle, not sure
  if the web version does that. There will be some kind of indicator
  "Press T for Turbo", which changes to "Turbo mode: Press T for normal",
  something like that.

I may do a "Taipan Plus" at some point. The regular Taipan game will be
faithful to the original, and the Plus version could have some or all of:

- More ports to dock at, some of which might have their own warehouses,
  repair yards, etc.

- More trade goods, not all of which are available at all ports.

- Actual market trends, rather than a base price + random number. There
  might be news events that cause prices to go up/down (e.g. Arms are
  up at Saigon because there's a gang war in progress, Opium is up at
  some port but the chances of getting busted are higher). This feature
  actually exists in Art Canfil's TRS-80 Taipan "version 10".

- Ability to control a fleet of ships. Each one will either be a cargo
  ship or a warship.

- A "Turbo Combat" feature like one of the phone versions I've seen. You
  set your orders and hit Turbo, and it finishes the fight instantly,
  but you can't change your mind about your orders (fight until you win
  or die, or run until you escape or die).

- Special missions. Someone at some port needs you to transport documents
  or whatever, to some other port... you will almost certainly be attacked
  by whoever's trying to get the documents though.

- Rival trading companies. Their activities can influence prices, and
  you can fight them and possibly salvage actual cargo.

- Variable passage of time. Distant ports take longer to get to. Also,
  winds or ship damage can slow you down.

I dunno how many of the above will fit in the Atari's RAM. Probably have
to rewrite the whole game from scratch in assembly before adding features.

