Build Requirements for Atari 8-bit Taipan:

- cc65. At least version 2.15. 2.13.x and 2.14 are specifically known
  not to work. To build the regular executable (taipan.xex), you can
  use any version from 2.15 to 2.19 (latest as of this writing). If
  you're still using cc65-2.14, it's about 8 years old, isn't it time
  to upgrade?

- make. I've used GNU make 3.82 and 4.1. I also occasionally test
  with an old version of BSD make, but not often. If you can't get
  BSD make to work for you, install gmake from ports/pkgsrc or whatever
  your platform uses.

- gcc. I've used versions 4.8.2 and 5.5.0, probably any version will do.
  I've also tested with clang and pcc. Pretty much any C compiler
  that produces native binaries for your platform should work. It's
  used for various host tools (convfont.c, textcomp.c, mkcart.c,
  gzip2deflate.c)

- perl. I used version 5.18.1 and later upgraded to 5.22.2. Probably
  any 5.x version will work.

- perl's Image::Magick module (which in turn requires the C ImageMagick
  library). I've used versions 6.8.6 and 6.9.4, probably any recent version
  will do.

- git. You don't exactly *need* this to build the code, but if you
  have it, the git hash will be built into the binary and appear on
  the title screen.

- A UNIX/POSIX environment. At least, you need command like cat, cp, rm,
  and a shell that does I/O redirection. Linux, BSD, and Mac OS X should
  be fine. If you're on Windows, try Cygwin.

If you plan to edit the port status screen, you'll need the Atari800
emulator. It's also handy for actually playing the game, whether you
build it or use the provided binary.


Building:

Hopefully you can just type "make" to create the taipan.xex binary. If
it doesn't work, you're likely missing one or more of the requirements
listed above.

If you'd prefer a cartridge image, "make cart" will build both a raw image
(taipan.rom) and an image with an Atari800 CART header (taipan.cart).

Once you've compiled Taipan, see RUNNING.txt to find out what to do
with the executable.
